---
summary: ᚹᛁᛈᛋᛏᛚᛣ
lesson: 1
---

# Preface

Welcome! What you are about to learn is *one way* to spell modern English with runes. There are other ways, however I believe that this is the most authentic and useful for the English language in particular. 

This method of using runes for modern English was developed by [Rune Revival](https://www.youtube.com/@LearnRunes). Subscribe to that channel! 

You will use only [Anglo-Saxon runes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anglo-Saxon_runes) with as little changes as possible from the original usage. Where there are changes, there is an order of consideration:

1. The historical record of Anglo Saxon rune usage
2. The era of latin letter usage in England that existed simultaneously with rune usage
3. More ancient rune usage from abroad
4. Modern latin letter usage

The majority of rune usage in this system is taken from #1. We pick up today right where they left off. But in some cases, English today is different from English back then. In these situations, we need to travel further down and take ideas from #2, #3, and #4.

# Getting used to the look

Let’s look closer at the runes themselves to give you an idea of what we’re dealing with:

<div style="font-size:2em;">ᚠᚢᚦᚩᚱᚳᚷᚹᚻᚾ</div>
<div style="font-size:2em;">ᛁᛄᛇᛈᛉᛋᛏᛏᛒᛖ</div>
<div style="font-size:2em;">ᛗᛚᛝᛟᛞᚪᚫᛠᚣᛣ</div>
<div style="font-size:2em;">ᚸᛢᛥᛡᛤ</div>

Thematically, you can notice some common patterns among how they look. These patterns don’t necessarily show correlation in sound, but sometimes they can. Please just look below and notice the lines and shapes of them. Don’t pay attention or think about the sounds they make yet.

<div style="font-size:2em;">ᚫᚪᚩ</div>
<div style="font-size:2em;">ᛁᛠᛏᛚᚹᚱᛒ</div>
<div style="font-size:2em;">ᛁᚷᛡᚾ</div>
<div style="font-size:2em;">ᚸᛄ</div>
<div style="font-size:2em;">ᚳᛣ</div>
<div style="font-size:2em;">ᛞᛗ</div>

The biggest change for the modern English speaker is that the runes are a single-height script. Now, this doesn't need to be the case in the future. Perhaps a future font will make the vowels (ᚫᛖᚢᛁᛄᛟᚣᚩᛠᛡ) short and make the consonants (ᛞᚻᛏᚾᛋᛚᚳᚱᚸᚠᛈᚷᛣᛒᛗᚹᚦᛉᛝᛇ) ascend or descend. But the fact is that today, all the fonts that you will use will be single-height. That is the normal way to see them.

There are people that say that single-height scripts are difficult to read, but I believe that this is just something that takes getting used to. Russian (Cyrillic), Chinese, and Korean (Hangeul) are all effectively single-height and people do just great with those scripts.

# Begin

> The rune for <strong>L</strong> is <mark>ᛚ</mark>.

> The rune for <strong>i</strong> is <mark>ᛁ</mark>.

> The rune for <strong>P</strong> is <mark>ᛈ</mark>.

Think about what the below runic text might spell. Click or tap on the text to see if you were correct!

<details>
    <summary>ᛈᛁᛚᛚ</summary>
    <p>pill</p>
</details>

> The rune for <strong>K</strong> is <mark>ᛣ</mark>.

<details>
    <summary>ᛣᛁᛚᛚ</summary>
    <p>kill</p>
</details>

> The rune for <strong>T</strong> is <mark>ᛏ</mark>.

<details>
    <summary>ᛏᛁᛚᛚ</summary>
    <p>till</p>
</details>

Now, at this point, you may be thinking "Wow, this runic spelling is just like latin spelling" because it has the double L. Not quite!

It's actually *better* than the latin spelling because it is *consistent*. 

It seems like latin spelling always doubles the consonant to make a shorter vowel sound, but that is not the case. In runic spelling however, this rule is consistently applied.

<details>
    <summary>ᛚᛁᛏᛏ</summary>
    <p>lit</p>
</details>

<details>
    <summary>ᛚᛁᛈᛈ</summary>
    <p>lip</p>
</details>

So what happens if we *don't* double the consonants in runic spelling?

<details>
    <summary>ᛈᛁᛚ</summary>
    <p>peel</p>
</details>

<details>
    <summary>ᛣᛁᛚ</summary>
    <p>keel</p>
</details>

<details>
    <summary>ᛏᛁᛚ</summary>
    <p>teal</p>
</details>

What you are realizing now is that the <strong>ᛁ</strong> rune has two sounds. The "i" in "if" as well as the long "ee" sound in "sleep".

<details>
    <summary>ᛈᛁᛣᛣ</summary>
    <p>pick</p>
</details>

<details>
    <summary>ᛈᛁᛣ</summary>
    <p>peak</p>
</details>

<details>
    <summary>ᛣᛚᛁᛈᛈ</summary>
    <p>clip</p>
</details>

> The rune for <strong>W</strong> is <mark>ᚹ</mark>.

Notice that this rune looks like a P, but it is not.

<details>
    <summary>ᛈᛁᚹᛁ</summary>
    <p>PeeWee</p>
</details>

<details>
    <summary>ᚹᛁᛚᛚ</summary>
    <p>will</p>
</details>

<details>
    <summary>ᚹᛁᛚ</summary>
    <p>wheel</p>
</details>

<details>
    <summary>ᚹᛁᛣᛣ</summary>
    <p>wick</p>
</details>

<details>
    <summary>ᚹᛁᛣ</summary>
    <p>week</p>
</details>

The rune for <strong>S</strong> is <mark>ᛋ</mark>.

<details>
    <summary>ᛋᛚᛁᛈᛈ</summary>
    <p>slip</p>
</details>

<details>
    <summary>ᛋᛚᛁᛈ</summary>
    <p>sleep</p>
</details>
