---
summary: ᛗᚩᚪᚫ
lesson: 3
---

The rune for <strong>M</strong> is <mark>ᛗ</mark>.

<details>
    <summary>ᛗᛁᛏᛏ</summary>
    <p>mitt</p>
</details>

<details>
    <summary>ᛗᛁᛣ</summary>
    <p>meek</p>
</details>

<details>
    <summary>ᛗᛁᛚᛚᛣ</summary>
    <p>milk</p>
</details>

The rune for the vowel in <strong>aw</strong>e is <mark>ᚩ</mark>.

<details>
    <summary>ᚹᚩᛣ</summary>
    <p>walk</p>
</details>

<details>
    <summary>ᛏᚩᛣ</summary>
    <p>talk</p>
</details>

Now what do you think happens if you double the consonant after this vowel?

<details>
    <summary>ᛋᚩᛣᛣ</summary>
    <p>sock</p>
</details>

It becomes the vowel in the [LOT lexical set](https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/lexicalsets/chapter/4-lot-lexical-set/). Note that for a number of English speakers, the vowels in the this lexical set will shift into other phonemes quite regularly. You can read that article for more info. Don't be dismayed if you can't figure out how "lot" is pronounced. If you're an American, you may almost never double the consonant after ᚩ. That is okay!

<details>
    <summary>ᛏᛁᛣᛣ᛫ᛏᚩᛣᛣ</summary>
    <p>tick tock</p>
</details>

The rune for the vowel in sp<strong>a</strong> is <mark>ᚪ</mark>.

Now, if you are an American, you may pronounce "tock" and "sock" more with this "spa" sound. Go ahead and spell it like ᛏᚪᛣ or ᛋᚪᛣ! The nice thing is that ᚩ and ᚪ look pretty similar to each other anyway :)

If you're an American, what does this say?

<details>
    <summary>ᛈᚪᛈ</summary>
    <p>pop</p>
</details>

If you're British, what does this say?

<details>
    <summary>ᛈᚩᛈᛈ</summary>
    <p>pop</p>
</details>

Now, what happens if we double the consonant after ᚪ?

<details>
    <summary>ᛈᚪᛏᛏ</summary>
    <p>putt</p>
</details>

<details>
    <summary>ᛈᚪᛈᛈ</summary>
    <p>pup</p>
</details>

<details>
    <summary>ᛏᚪᛣᛣ</summary>
    <p>tuck</p>
</details>

<details>
    <summary>ᛣᚪᛈᛈ</summary>
    <p>cup</p>
</details>

You might be wondering, "what do these two sounds have in common with each other? why use the same rune for both?" Let me show you with a couple of examples.

Americans say "what" like ᚹᚪᛏᛏ (wut). This is often exhaggerated in a silly way like ᚹᚪᛏ (wat).

British people say ᛗᚪᛗᛗ (mum) while Americans say ᛗᚪᛗ (mahm).

These two examples show that in our minds, we do think of these two sounds as being somewhat related. And that is often expressed in our colloquialisms and slang.

<details>
    <summary>ᛋᚪᛗᛗ</summary>
    <p>some</p>
</details>

<details>
    <summary>ᛣᛚᚪᛏᛏᛋ</summary>
    <p>klutz</p>
</details>


The rune for the vowel in c<strong>a</strong>t is <mark>ᚫ</mark>.
